TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

  Footnote anchors are denoted by [number], and the footnotes have
  been placed at the end of the paragraph.

  Some minor changes to the text are noted at the end of the book.


                                 1858.

                             CENTRAL PARK.

                                 1868.




  “Meantime, with cheap land, and the pacific disposition of the
  people, everything invites to the arts of agriculture, of gardening,
  and domestic architecture. Public gardens on the scale of such
  plantations in Europe and Asia, are now unknown to us. There is no
  feature of the old countries that strikes an American with more
  agreeable surprise than the beautiful gardens of Europe; such as the
  Boboli, in Florence, the Villa Borghese, in Rome, the Villa d’Este,
  in Tivoli, the gardens at Munich, and at Frankfort on the Maine:
  works easily imitated here, and which might well make the land dear
  to the citizen, and inflame patriotism.”—_Emerson_, 1844.




                              DESCRIPTION

                                 OF A

                       PLAN FOR THE IMPROVEMENT

                                OF THE

                             Central Park.

                             “GREENSWARD.”

                 [F. L. OLMSTED       CALVERT VAUX.]

                            NEW YORK, 1858.

                           [REPRINTED 1868.]




    _The Aldine Press._—Sutton, Bowne & Co., 23 Liberty St., N. Y.




                             NOTE, 1868.


The following Description was prepared in 1858 to accompany the first
study of our design for the Central Park, the appended woodcut being
printed with the Report.

A few notes are added in this edition, together with a map showing to
what extent the intention of the plan has, thus far, been realized and
in what manner the study has been elaborated.

                                                                O. & V.




                               REPORT.


[Sidenote: Topographical suggestions.]

A general survey of the ground allotted to the park, taken with a view
to arrive at the leading characteristics which present themselves as
all-important to be considered in adapting the actual situation to
its purpose, shows us, in the first place, that it is very distinctly
divided into two tolerably equal portions, which, for convenience
sake, may be called the upper and lower parks.

[Sidenote: The upper park.]

The horizon lines of the upper park are bold and sweeping and the
slopes have great breadth in almost every aspect in which they may be
contemplated. As this character is the highest ideal that can be aimed
at for a park under any circumstances, and as it is in most decided
contrast to the confined and formal lines of the city, it is desirable
to interfere with it, by cross-roads and other constructions, as
little as possible. Formal planting and architectural effects, unless
on a very grand scale, must be avoided; and as nearly all the ground
between the Reservoir and 106th Street (west of the Boston road) is
seen in connection, from any point within itself, a unity of character
should be studiously preserved in all the gardening details.

[Sidenote: The lower park.]

The lower park is far more heterogeneous in its character and will
require a much more varied treatment. The most important feature
in its landscape is the long rocky and wooded hill-side lying
immediately south of the Reservoir. Inasmuch as beyond this point
there do not appear to be any leading natural characteristics of
similar consequence in the scenery, it will be important to draw as
much attention as possible to this hill-side, to afford facilities
for rest and leisurely contemplation upon the rising ground opposite,
and to render the lateral boundaries of the park in its vicinity as
inconspicuous as possible. The central and western portion of the
lower park is an irregular table-land; the eastern is composed of
a series of graceful undulations, suggesting lawn or gardenesque
treatment. In the extreme south we find some flat alluvial meadow; but
the general character of the ground is rugged and there are several
bold, rocky bluffs, that help to give individuality to this part of
the composition.

       *       *       *       *       *

Such being the general suggestions that our survey has afforded,
it becomes necessary to consider how the requirements of the
Commissioners, as given in their instructions, may be met with the
least sacrifice of the characteristic excellencies of the ground.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Preliminary considerations.]

Up to this time, in planning public works for the city of New York,
in no instance has adequate allowance been made for its increasing
population and business; not even in the case of the Croton Aqueduct,
otherwise so well considered. The City-Hall, the best architectural
work in the State, and built to last for centuries, does not at this
time afford facilities for one-third the business for which it was
intended. The present Post-Office, expensively fitted up some ten
years ago, no longer answers its purpose, and a new one of twice
its capacity is imperatively demanded. The Custom-House, expressly
designed for permanence and constructed to that end at enormous
expense less than twenty years ago, is not half large enough to
accommodate the present commerce of the city.

The explanation of this apparently bad calculation is mainly given
with the fact that, at every census since that of 1860, the city’s
rate of increase has been found to be overrunning the rate previously
established.

A wise forecast of the future gave the proposed park the name of
Central. Our present chief magistrate, who can himself remember
market-gardens below Canal street, and a post-and-rail fence on the
north side of City-Hall park, warned his coadjutors, in his inaugural
message, to expect a great and rapid movement of population toward the
parts of the island adjoining the Central Park. A year hence, five
city railroads will bring passengers as far up as the park, if not
beyond it. Recent movements to transfer the steamboat-landings and
railroad stations, although as yet unsuccessful, indicate changes we
are soon to expect.

The 17,000 lots withdrawn from use for building purposes in the park
itself, will greatly accelerate the occupation of the adjoining land.
Only twenty years ago, Union Square was “out of town;” twenty years
hence, the town will have enclosed the Central Park. Let us consider,
therefore, what will at that time be satisfactory, for it is then that
the design will have to be really judged.

No longer an open suburb, our ground will have around it a continuous
high wall of brick, stone, and marble. The adjoining shores will
be lined with commercial docks and warehouses; steamboat and ferry
landings, railroad stations, hotels, theatres, factories, will be on
all sides of it and above it; all which our park must be made to fit.

The demolition of Columbia College, and the removal of the cloistral
elms which so long enshadowed it; the pertinacious demand for a
division of Trinity churchyard; the numerous instances in which our
old graveyards have actually been broken up; the indirect concession
of the most important space in the City-Hall park for the purposes
of a thoroughfare and the further contraction it is now likely to
suffer; together with the constant enormous expenditure of the city
and sacrifices of the citizens, in the straightening and widening of
streets, are all familiar facts, that teach us a lesson of the most
pressing importance in our present duty. To its application we give
the first place in our planning.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: The transverse roads.]

Our instructions call for four transverse roads. Each of these will be
the sole line of communication between one side of the town and the
other, for a distance equal to that between Chambers street and Canal
street. If we suppose but one crossing of Broadway to be possible
in this interval, we shall realize what these transverse roads are
destined to become. Inevitably they will be crowded thoroughfares,
having nothing in common with the park proper, but every thing at
variance with those agreeable sentiments which we should wish the park
to inspire. It will not be possible to enforce the ordinary police
regulations of public parks upon them. They must be constantly open to
all the legitimate traffic of the city, to coal carts and butchers’
carts, dust carts and dung carts; engine companies will use them,
those on one side the park rushing their machines across it with
frantic zeal at every alarm from the other; ladies and invalids will
need special police escort for crossing them, as they do in lower
Broadway: eight times in a single circuit of the park will they
oblige a pleasure drive or stroll to encounter a turbid stream of
coarse traffic, constantly moving at right angles to the line of the
park movement.

The transverse roads will also have to be kept open, while the
park proper will be useless for any good purpose, after dusk, for
experience has shown that even in London, with its admirable police
arrangements, the public cannot be secured safe transit through large
open spaces of ground after nightfall.

[Sidenote: Foreign examples.]

These public thoroughfares will then require to be well lighted at the
sides and, to restrain marauders pursued by the police from escaping
into the obscurity of the park, strong fences or walls, six or eight
feet high, will be necessary. A public road thus guarded passes
through the Regent’s Park of London, at the Zoological Gardens. It
has the objection that the fence, with its necessary gates at every
crossing of the park drives, roads or paths, is not only a great
inconvenience but a disagreeable object in the landscape.

To avoid a similar disfigurement an important passage across the
garden of the Tuileries is closed by gates at night, forcing all who
would otherwise use it to go a long distance to the right or left.

The form and position of the Central Park are peculiar in respect to
this difficulty, and such that precedent in dealing with it is rather
to be sought in the long and narrow Boulevards of some of the old
Continental cities of Europe, than in the broad parks with which,
from its area in acres, we are most naturally led to compare it. The
Boulevards referred to are, however, generally used only as walks, not
as drives or places of ceremony. In frequent instances, in order not
to interrupt their alleys, the streets crossing them are made in the
form of causeways and carried over on high arches. This, of course,
destroys all landscape effect, since it puts an abrupt limit to the
view. Some expedient is needed for the Central Park by which the
convenience of the arrangement may be retained, while the objection is
as far as possible avoided.

[Sidenote: The present design.]

In the plan herewith offered to the Commission, each of the transverse
roads is intended to be sunk so far below the general surface that the
park drives may, at every necessary point of intersection, be carried
entirely over it, without any obvious elevation or divergence from
their most attractive routes. The banks on each side will be walled up
to the height of about seven feet, thus forming the protective barrier
required by police considerations, and a little judicious planting on
the tops or slopes of the banks above these walls will, in most cases,
entirely conceal both the roads and the vehicles moving in them, from
the view of those walking or driving in the park.[1]

[1] NOTE, 1868.—In execution, the four traffic roads have been carried
through the Park in the manner suggested.

If the position which has just been taken with regard to the necessity
for permanently open transverse thoroughfares is found to be correct,
it follows necessarily that the 700 acres allowed to the new park
must, in the first instance, be subdivided definitely, although it is
to be hoped to some extent invisibly, into five separate and distinct
sections, only connected here and there by roads crossing them; and if
the plan of making these thoroughfares by sunken roads is approved,
they will, as it appears to us, from the nature of the ground, have to
be laid down somewhat on the lines indicated on the plan. If so, the
problem to be solved is narrowed in its dimensions, and the efforts
of the designer can be no longer directed to an arrangement that
shall agreeably use up the space of 700 acres allotted, but to making
some plan that shall have unity of effect as a whole, and yet avoid
collision in its detailed features with the intersecting lines thus
suggested. It is on this basis that the present plan has, in the first
instance, been founded. If the sunken transverse roads were omitted,
the design would not be less complete in character; but it is, on
the other hand, so laid out that the transverse thoroughfares do not
interfere materially with its general or detailed effect.

[Sidenote: Surface transverse roads.]

After having planned the park drives agreeably to these views, we
observed that three additional moderately direct, transverse roads
had occurred. These will afford facilities for crossing the park to
all vehicles of classes which it will be proper to admit upon them,
such as hackney coaches and all private carriages; and thus seven
transverse roads will be really provided to be used during daylight.
Four roads will probably be amply adequate for the night traffic
needing to cross the park; but it might be questioned if this number
would be sufficient during the day.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: The exterior.]

As it is not proposed that the park proper shall be lighted at night,
it is well worth while to consider if the advantages which it offers
as an interesting promenade may not yet in some way be obtained at
night.

[Sidenote: Fifth Avenue.]

[Sidenote: Eighth avenue Railroad.]

The ordinance that regulates the width of Fifth avenue, provides
for an open space of fifteen feet on each side, exclusive of that
required for the sidewalks and the roadway; consequently, a space of
thirty feet in width is already prepared for on this side of the park
for its whole length. On the Eighth avenue a similar arrangement may
probably be effected, and as there would be no occasion to back up
carts against the park side of the avenue, it is feasible to carry the
railway tracks close to the edge of the walk, thus leaving a clear
space for carriages on the opposite or building side and making the
access to the park side more clean and convenient.[2]

[2] NOTE, 1868.—The sidewalks have been treated in execution as
proposed, but the suggestion in regard to the railroad has not
yet been carried out. In the Brooklyn Park however the intended
arrangement has been fully realized.

[Sidenote: Fifty-Ninth and One Hundred and Sixth streets.]

On the southern boundary it is not desirable to reduce the already
moderate width of the carriage way. It is, on the other hand, a
question whether, as the streets and the park both, in reality,
are the property of one owner—the City—this street should not be
treated in a similar manner. It will, from its position, be in time
rather crowded with traffic, and will, therefore, have some claim
to be widened on this ground alone. As a question of beauty of
arrangement for the park itself, however, it is conceived that if
by this management a more stately character than could otherwise be
obtained would be secured to the outer boundaries of the park, it
would be cheaply purchased at the sacrifice of a few feet at the south
end, off its present length of two and a half miles. In riding along
any of the avenues, the eye cannot fail to be struck with the great
difference in dignity of effect, between such streets as Fourteenth
and Twenty-Third, and those intermediate, and it would be a matter of
regret that a source of effect so easily obtained, should be lost in
connection with the grand approaches to the park, because it does not
happen that its boundaries at present coincide with the wide streets
laid out on the working plan upon which the city is being constructed.
If, moreover, the advantage of the evening promenade is allowed to be
of importance, we should be sorry to dispense with this section of it,
which would be the only portion having a direct communication from the
Sixth and Seventh avenues.

[Sidenote: Treatment of boundary lines.]

For the purpose of concealing the houses on the opposite side of the
street, from the park, and to insure an umbrageous horizon line, it
is proposed, as will be seen in the plan, to plant a line of trees
all around the outer edge of the park, between the sidewalk and the
roadway.[3] On approaching the Fifth and Eighth avenue entrances,
this line of trees along Fifty-Ninth street will come prominently
into view, and have a handsome effect, if the street is widened; but
if Fifty-Ninth street is allowed to remain as a narrow street, it
is feared that it will be difficult to prevent this boundary line
of the park from having a contracted and somewhat mean appearance.
Hence, we have thought it proper in our plan to assume the advantage
and practicability of this arrangement to be conceded; but, if this
should not be the case, it will be readily perceived that it forms no
essential part of our design.[4]

[3] NOTE, 1868.—This feature of the design has been partially carried
into execution and is in progress from year to year, as the street and
avenue grades become settled.

[4] NOTE, 1868.—In execution, 59th street has been treated as here
recommended.

On the space originally provided for a sidewalk on the park side of
the streets and avenues, there will, in any case, be room for such
a line of trees as we have proposed. The continuous exterior mall
should by no means be given up, even though it cannot be made in all
parts as wide as we have proposed. At many points, and frequently for
quite long distances, it will form an elevated terrace, commanding
extensive views over the park, of the most interesting character, and
a mere parapet-wall three or four feet high, will, in such cases, be
all-sufficient for the safety of promenaders and the protection of the
park from interlopers.

[Sidenote: Fifth avenue entrance.]

The finest approach from the city is certain to be along the Fifth
avenue, and it has been thought necessary to view with special care
the angle of the park first reached from this direction, because it
will be generally felt that immediate entrance should be had at this
point.[5]

[5] NOTE, 1868.—We submitted a plan for a much needed amplification in
this approach during the earlier stage of the work, but the suggestion
has not yet been acted on.

The grade of the avenue has been established so high that considerable
filling-in would be required to avoid a rapid descent, but directly
this single difficulty is overcome, the ground beyond has great
advantages for the purpose of a dignified entrance to the park. A
massive rock that will be found in connection with this requisite
made-ground, offers a sufficiently large natural object to occupy
the attention, and will at once reduce the artificial feature to a
position of minor importance. If, next, we stand upon that portion
of the rock which (a little north of the large cherry-tree) is at
grade-height, we find that there is another rocky hillock within a
short distance, in the direction a visitor to the park would most
naturally pursue—that is to say, towards the centre of the park. This
can be easily reached by slightly raising the intermediate ground; by
then sweeping to the right, the natural conformation of the surface
offers an easy ascent (by the existing cart-way over Sixty-Third
street) to a plateau (two rods west of the powder-house), directly
connected with the extensive table-land which occupies the centre of
the lower half of the park.

From this plateau (now occupied mainly by the nursery) a view is had
of nearly all the park up to the Reservoir, in a northerly direction;
and on looking to the south and west, we perceive that there are
natural approaches from these directions, which suggest that we have
arrived at a suitable point of concentration for all approaches which
may be made from the lower part of the city to the interior of the
park.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: The Avenue.]

Vista Rock, the most prominent point in the landscape of the lower
park, here first comes distinctly into view, and fortunately in a
direction diagonal to the boundary lines, from which it is desirable
to withdraw attention in every possible way. We therefore accept this
line of view as affording an all-sufficient motive to our further
procedure. Although averse on general principles to a symmetrical
arrangement of trees, we consider it an essential feature of a
metropolitan park, that it should contain a grand promenade, level,
spacious, and thoroughly shaded. This result can in no other way be
so completely arrived at, as by an avenue, which in itself even,
exclusive of its adaptability for this purpose, contains so many
elements of grandeur and magnificence, that it should be recognized
as an essential feature in the arrangement of any large park. The
objection to which it is liable is that it divides the landscape into
two parts, and it is therefore desirable to decide at what point this
necessity can be submitted to with the least sacrifice to the general
effect. The whole topographical character of the park is so varied,
so suggestive of natural treatment, so picturesque, so individual in
its characteristics, that it would be contrary to common sense to
make the avenue its leading feature, or to occupy any great extent
of ground for this special purpose. It must be subservient to the
general design, if that general design is to be in accordance with the
present configuration of the ground, and we have therefore thought
that it should, so far as possible, be complete in itself, and not
become a portion of any of the leading drives. There is no dignity
of effect to be produced by driving through an avenue a quarter of a
mile long, unless it leads to, and becomes an accessory of, some grand
architectural structure, which itself, and not the avenue, is the
ultimatum of interest. An avenue for driving in should be two or three
miles long, or it will be petite and disappointing. We have therefore
thought it most desirable to identify the idea of the avenue with the
promenade, for which purpose a quarter of a mile is not insufficient,
and we can find no better place for such a grand mall, or open air
hall of reception, as we desire to have, than the ground before us.[6]

[6] NOTE, 1868.—In execution, this avenue has been planted with elms,
as suggested later in the report, and is now called “The Mall.”

[Sidenote: The Promenade.]

In giving it this prominent position, we look at it in the light of
an artificial structure on a scale of magnitude commensurate with the
size of the park, and intend in our design that it should occupy the
same position of relative importance in the general arrangement of
the plan that a mansion should occupy in a park prepared for private
occupation. The importance that is justly connected with the idea of
the residence of the owner in even the most extensive private grounds,
finds no parallel in a public park, however small, and we feel that
the interest of the visitor, who, in the best sense is the true
owner in the latter case, should concentrate on features of natural,
in preference to artificial, beauty. Many elegant buildings may be
appropriately erected for desirable purposes in a public park, but we
conceive that all such architectural structures should be confessedly
subservient to the main idea, and that nothing artificial should be
obtruded on the view as an ultimatum of interest. The idea of the park
itself should always be uppermost in the mind of the beholder. Holding
this general principle to be of considerable importance, we have
preferred to place the avenue where it can be terminated appropriately
at one end with a landscape attraction of considerable extent, and to
relieve the south entrance with only so much architectural treatment
as may give the idea that due regard has been paid to the adornment of
this principal promenade, without interfering with its real character.

This avenue may be considered the central feature in our plan for
laying out the lower park, and the other details of arrangement are
more or less designed in connection with it.

[Sidenote: Parade ground.]

To the west is the parade ground, containing about 25 acres, that
may, at a moderate expense, be levelled and made suitable for its
purpose;[7] and also some eight or ten acres of broken ground, that
will be more or less available for military exercises. Such a broad
open plane of well-kept grass would be a refreshing and agreeable
feature in the general design, and would bear to be of much greater
extent than is here shown, if the lot were of a different shape; but
under the circumstances, 25 acres seems as much as can well be spared
for the purpose. A military entrance from Eighth avenue is proposed to
be made at Sixty-Ninth street, which has been already, at considerable
expense, cut through the rock at this point, and offers a suggestion
for a picturesque approach, with a portcullis gate, and with the main
park drive carried over it at a higher level.

[7] NOTE, 1868.—A Parade ground was demanded by the schedule of
instructions furnished to competitors. In execution this open space
under the name of “The Green” has been retained as a prominent feature
of the design, but has not been and is not intended to be used for
military exercises.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Playground.]

The natural southern boundary of the table-land occupied by the parade
ground is a rapid slope that occurs about in the line of Sixty-Sixth
street; in this slope it is proposed to sink one of the transverse
roads; and on a level plane below it, stretching to the south, a
playground about ten acres in extent is located, as indicated on the
plan. We have thought it very desirable to have a cricket ground of
this size near the southern boundary of the park, and not far from the
Sixth and Eighth avenue railroads, which offer the most rapid means
of access from the lower part of the city.[8]

[8] The playground has been arranged as here recommended.

In this playground sites are suggested for two buildings of moderate
dimensions: one for visitors to view the games, which would be
appropriately located on a large rock that overlooks the ground; and
the other for the players, at the entrance from the transverse road,
by which an exit could be obtained from the playground after the
other gates were closed.[9] Only one mass of rock of any considerable
magnitude would require to be blasted out for the purpose of adapting
this ground to its intended purpose; its position is indicated on the
plan by a red cross, and the object of its removal will be seen on
examination. This part of the design is illustrated in study No. 2.
The ground at the south-west corner of the park it is proposed to fill
in sufficiently to make, on the plan indicated, an agreeable Eighth
avenue entrance.

[9] NOTE, 1868.—The foundation for this building was laid during the
last season.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: The lower lake.]

To the south-east of the promenade, and between the Fifth and Sixth
avenue entrances, it is proposed to form a lake of irregular shape,
and with an area of 8 or 9 acres. This arrangement has been suggested
by the present nature of the ground, which is low and somewhat swampy.
It is conceived that, by introducing such an ornamental sheet of water
into the composition at this point, the picturesque effect of the
bold bluffs that will run down to its edge and overhang it, must be
much increased;[10] and that by means of such a natural boundary, this
rocky section of the park will be rendered more retired and attractive
as a pleasant walk or lounge. The proposed effect of this part of the
design, as it will appear from the Fifth avenue entrance, is indicated
on study No. 1.[11]

[10] NOTE, 1868.—An improvement of the soil and of the skylines of
this rocky section, contemplated at the time the plan was made, was
last year carried into execution, by means of earth filling on the
more prominent summit levels.

[11] NOTE, 1868.—The original requirements of the Commission in regard
to boundary and expense necessitated, in the first study, a cramped
and unsatisfactory arrangement of the entrances on Fifty-ninth street.
We have since made studies for the amplification of each of the
principal approaches, and the necessary legislation in regard to the
entrance at 8th Avenue and 59th street having been obtained at the
instance of the property owners in the neighborhood, this improvement
is shown on the map of the Park, dated 1868.

[Sidenote: The Arsenal.]

To the south-east of the promenade will be found that portion of
the park in which the present Arsenal is situated. This ground is
undulating and agreeable in its character, and will offer pleasant
opportunities for shady walks. The Arsenal itself, although at present
a very unattractive structure, and only tolerably built, contains a
great deal of room in a form that adapts it very well to the purposes
of a museum. It is proposed, therefore, to improve its external
appearance so far as may be necessary, without changing its shape or
usefulness, or going to any great expense; and as it occurs rather
near the Fifth avenue entrance, and is, therefore, likely to occupy
too considerable a share of attention if left exposed to view from the
south, it is intended, as early as possible, to plant in its vicinity
forest-trees, calculated to become handsome specimens of large size,
and that will, after a few years, prevent the museum from attracting
an undue share of attention in the general landscape.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Music-Hall.]

To the east of the promenade, there will be a half-mile stretch of
lawn and trees extending from the vicinity of Fifty-Ninth street
to Seventy-Second street, and this will be the dress ground of the
park; and in a prominent position on this ground, and immediately
connected with the grand mall, the site for a music-hall, called for
in our instructions, has been set apart; and we have suggested that a
palm-house and large conservatory should be added to this music-hall
whenever it is built.[12]

[12] NOTE, 1868.—This site is now occupied by a building which we
designed for a Ladies’ Restaurant, sites on a somewhat larger scale
being reserved for a music-hall and conservatory, which yet remain to
be erected.

This site is recommended because it is conspicuous without being
obtrusive, and is easy of access from the promenade and from one of
the leading avenue entrances; while, to the north, it commands from
its terraces and verandas the finest views that are to be obtained in
the lower part of the park. It also overlooks the site which we have
selected as most appropriate for the flower-garden called for in our
instructions; and this we consider a decided advantage, as the most
attractive view of a flower-garden is from some point above it, that
will enable the visitor to take in at a glance a general idea of the
effect aimed at.

[Sidenote: The Flower Garden.]

The garden is located in low ground to the north-east of the
promenade, and close upon the line of Fifth avenue, the grade of
which opposite the centre of the garden is about twenty feet above
the present level of the ground; this, for the reasons above stated,
we consider a desideratum, and have suggested that over the arcade
or veranda that we propose should be built against the east wall
of the park in connection with the garden, a structure should be
erected, with an entrance on a level with the avenue, so as to give an
opportunity for a view of the garden, both from this level and from
another story above it. This idea is not, of course, necessary to the
design, and the sketch submitted is merely a suggestion to show what
may be done at some future time.[13]

[13] NOTE, 1868.—While the construction of the park was in
progress Messrs Parsons & Co., who held a contract granted by the
Commissioners, employed us to develop this general idea in the form
of a two-story glass building, of which the upper section is the
conservatory proper and the lower portion is proposed to be used for
the exhibition and sale of flowers, but the design has not yet been
executed.

The plan of the flower-garden itself is geometrical; and it is
surrounded by an irregular and less formal plantation of shrubs, that
will serve to connect it with the park proper. In the centre it is
proposed to construct a large basin for a fountain, with a high jet;
other smaller jets are prepared for, as indicated; and, in connection
with the north wall, which will be somewhat below the surface of the
ground beyond, it is proposed to arrange some such wall fountain as
the celebrated one of Trevi. The water for this fountain will, in
the present case, be supplied from the skating pond and also from
the Reservoir, and will fall into a semi-circular marble basin, with
a paved floor. Such a fountain is out of place unless it can be
furnished with an ample supply of water; but, in the position assigned
to it on our plan, there will be no difficulty in procuring all the
water that can be required for the purpose; and it seems desirable,
therefore, to take advantage of the opportunity offered, for the
effect of a sculptured fountain of this sort is quite distinct from
that produced by a jet d’eau.

       *       *       *       *       *

A colored plan of this part of the design is illustrated to an
enlarged scale on study No. 11.

       *       *       *       *       *

To the north-west of the promenade is a slope, offering an appropriate
site for a summer-house, that in such a situation should have some
architectural pretension; and further to the west, near Eighth avenue,
is a stretch of table-land, terminated by an abrupt rocky descent,
that suggests itself as well suited for a Casino or refreshment
house.[14]

[14] NOTE, 1868.—This ground still remains unimproved, it being the
intention to develop the idea referred to in the report, although the
plans for the structure are not yet finally decided on.

       *       *       *       *       *

From the upper end of the promenade the rocky hill-side to the north,
surmounted by Vista Rock at its highest point, comes in full view;
and on this rock it will be generally conceded a tower should be
erected—but by no means a large one, or the whole scale of the view
will be destroyed.[15] To the north and north-west of the promenade, a
tract of low ground is proposed to be converted into the skating pond
called for in our instructions; and the picturesque scenery between
Vista Rock and the promenade will thus be heightened in effect, when
seen from the south side of this lake, of about 14 acres. A terrace
approach, as shown on the plan, and on study No. 3, is proposed,
from the avenue to the water.[16] This feature, although by no means
absolutely necessary, would add much to the general effect, and could
be introduced at any future time, if it is preferred at present to
treat the ground occupied by it in a less artificial style.

[15] NOTE, 1868.—The foundations for this work were commenced last
season on a rocky promontory which formed a part of the Croton
reservoir inclosure when it was expected to be bounded by street
lines, but which has lately been added to the park territory, in
accordance with our suggestion.

[16] NOTE, 1868.—The architectural treatment of the terrace approach
has been developed in detail during the progress of the work, but much
of the intended effect still remains to be realized.

Immediately in the vicinity of Vista Rock is the south wall of the
present reservoir. This wall occupies the whole of the middle of the
park, and is a blank, uninteresting object, that can in no way be
made particularly attractive. We have therefore, thought it necessary
to bear this in mind in arranging the general plan, and have given a
direction to the lines of drive leading this way from the lower part
of the park, that will enable them to avoid the wall of the reservoir
altogether.[17] The necessity for doing this has induced us to
commence diverting the lines of drive at the south end of the grand
promenade, which seems to offer a sufficient reason for so doing, and
to lead them afterwards on their northerly course in such a way that
they may pass naturally to the east and west of the reservoir. If any
drive proceeded in the direction of the line of avenue, and at once
crossed the ground proposed to be occupied by the lake, the reservoir
would inevitably become the terminal feature of the lower part of the
park, and this would be disagreeable. The skating pond will offer a
sufficiently natural barrier to this direct mode of proceeding, and
will furnish a reason for locating the promenade in its proposed
position, and also for terminating it where suggested; and by carrying
a road along the edge of the water, an opportunity will be given
to lengthen out the drive commanding the principal views in this
vicinity; the lake will also help to give a retired and agreeable
character to the hill-side beyond, which is well adapted for pic-nic
parties and pleasant strolls. Even if the reservoir did not occur in
its present position, the conformation of the ground is such that the
roads would naturally take, to a considerable extent, the direction
indicated, leaving the centre of the park undivided by a drive.

[17] NOTE, 1868.—In execution, the lines have been carried out as here
indicated, and as the trees grow up the old square reservoir is less
and less thought of as an obstruction in the composition.

The management of the ground between the skating pond and Vista
Rock[18] appears to be indicated by its form and the character of
its present growth. It is well sheltered, and large masses of rock
occur at intervals. The soil is moist, and altogether remarkably
well adapted to what is called in Europe an American garden, that
is, a ground for the special cultivation of hardy plants of the
natural order Ericacæi, consisting of rhododendrons, andromedas,
azaleas, kalmias, rhodoras, &c.[19] The present growth, consisting of
sweet-gum, spice-bush, tulip-tree, sassafras, red-maple, black-oak,
azalea, andromeda, &c., is exceedingly intricate and interesting. The
ground is at present too much encumbered with stone, and with various
indifferent plants.[20] By clearing these away, and carefully leaving
what is valuable; by making suitable paths, planting abundantly, as
above suggested, and introducing fastigiate shrubs and evergreens
occasionally, to prevent a monotony of bushes, the place may be made
very charming. Where the hill-side approaches the lake, sufficient
openings are proposed to be left for occasional glimpses, or more open
views, of the water; and glades of fine turf are intended to occur
at favorable intervals, so as to offer pleasant spots for rest and
recreation.

[18] NOTE, 1868.—The ground here referred to is now called “The
Ramble.”

[19] NOTE, 1868.—This suggestion has been partially realized but yet
remains to be fully developed.

[20] NOTE, 1868.—Many of these which we have marked for removal, have
hitherto, for various reasons, been allowed to remain.

[Sidenote: Playground.]

[Sidenote: Winter drive.]

[Sidenote: Berceau walks.]

[Sidenote: Police station.]

To the east and south-east of the present reservoir, the general
conformation of the surface continues to be of the same easy,
undulating character as that to the east of the promenade, and can
be treated in a similar manner. The whole space is intended to be
occupied with stretches of well-kept turf, with fine groups and
single trees, so planted that they may appear to advantage, and
not crowd each other. That portion which is immediately east of
the reservoir is set apart for one of the playgrounds;[21] and in
the strip of land between the main drive and the reservoir wall, a
reserved garden is provided for, with gardener’s house attached;
this will be needed in connection with the flower-garden already
described. On the west side of the reservoir the ground is of an
irregular character, which continues past the old and new reservoirs
to the upper end of the site. The spaces remaining for park use
will, however, be so much contracted by the reservoir walls and
embankments, that extended landscape effects are out of the question.
It is intended, therefore, as the soil and situation are adapted to
the purpose, to arrange in this locality a winter drive about a mile
and a half in length, and to plant somewhat thickly with evergreens,
introducing deciduous trees and shrubs occasionally, to relieve the
monotony of effect that otherwise might occur. Large open glades of
grass are introduced among these plantations of evergreens, as the
effect aimed at is not so much that of a drive through a thick forest,
crowded with tall spindling trees, as through a richly wooded country,
in which the single trees and copses have had plenty of space for
developing their distinctive characteristics to advantage.[22]
Immediately south and west of the present reservoir, terraces
have been already formed, and these can readily be converted into
continuous arbors, or berceau walks. Access will thus be provided to
all the gates of the reservoir, and the wall will itself be planted
out. The effect of these closely shaded walks will also, it is
conceived, offer an agreeable contrast to the views obtainable from
Vista Rock, in the immediate vicinity.[23] In the northern section of
this locality, and in connection with one of the transverse roads,
will be found the house of the Superintendent, the office of the
Commission, the police station, and other necessary buildings, such
as stables, &c. The site is not far from the one at present occupied
by the police, and is thought to be well suited for its purpose. By
making a private entrance along the wall of the reservoir, the whole
establishment can be immediately connected, by means of the transverse
road, with the city streets, and at the same time be central and
elevated without being unpleasantly prominent. It is proposed, as will
be seen on the plan, to make short connections from the park roads to
the transverse thoroughfare north of the present reservoir, so as to
admit of visitors shortening the drive in this way if preferred.

[21] NOTE, 1868.—This tract of ground is now recommended as the
site for the formal flower-garden in connection with a group of
architectural structures that will include music-hall, art galleries,
horticultural and other museums, and refreshment rooms on a liberal
scale; the intention of allowing military exercises on the park having
been abandoned, and the Green serving the purpose of the playground
above proposed.

[22] NOTE, 1868,—These plantations have been made as designed.

[23] NOTE, 1868.—The idea of the berceau walk has been carried out in
execution on the south side of the reservoir.

[Sidenote: Reservoir ride.]

The new reservoir, with its high banks, will take up a great deal of
room in the park, and although it will offer a large sheet of water
to the view, it will be at too high a level to become a landscape
attraction from the ordinary drives and walks. It is suggested,
therefore, that all round it a ride shall be constructed, and
carefully prepared for this purpose only; and although this feature
may be somewhat costly in the first instance, it is conceived that the
result would be worth the outlay, for the sake of its advantages as
a ride over a mile and a half in length, commanding the view of the
reservoir, and uninterfered with by the regular drives, although in
connection with them at different points.[24]

[24] NOTE, 1868.—In execution the design of this separate bridle road
has been much amplified.

On the east of the new reservoir, the park is diminished to a mere
passage-way for connection, and it will be difficult to obtain an
agreeable effect in this part of the design, unless some architectural
character is given to it. It is not recommended, however, to attempt
any such effect immediately, or out of the funds of the Commission,
but to accept the high bank of the reservoir as a barrier to the west,
for a few years; because it is thought that as soon as this part
of the city is built up to any considerable extent, it will not be
difficult to obtain an enriched architectural effect, appropriate to
the purpose, without expense to the Commission. An arcade, 100 feet
deep, could be substantially built, and the drive could be carried
above this arcade on a level with the reservoir, and overlooking
Fifth avenue, the remainder of the ground being filled in; and it is
thought that as this arcade may be lighted from the rear, and will
face a fashionable thoroughfare, it will offer, at no distant period,
very valuable lots for stores, or other purposes; and as it is a third
of a mile in extent, it may be a source of revenue, in rent, to the
park fund, instead of a burden on it.[25]

[25] NOTE, 1868.—In execution the simpler plan above suggested was
adopted, and the arrangement will probably remain intact for a number
of years.

[Sidenote: Tower on Bogardus Hill.]

The north-westerly portion of the park, above the new reservoir, is
planned very simply, in accordance with what we conceive to be the
suggestion of the ground. The evergreen drive is continued nearly to
the foot of Bogardus Hill, and then somewhat changing its character,
turns to the east. At this point a branch road crosses a brook, that
is made to expand into a pool a little below the bridge; and this road
then winds gradually to the top of the hill, which offers an available
site for some monument of public importance, that may also be used
as an observatory tower. If as is not improbable, the transatlantic
telegraph is brought to a favorable issue, while the park is in an
early stage of construction, many reasons could, we think, be urged
for commemorating the event by some such monument as the one suggested
on the plan, and in study No. 9. The picturesque effect of a spring of
clear water, that already exists in this vicinity, may be heightened,
as suggested in study No. 10.

The central portion of the upper section of the park is left as open
as possible, and can be levelled so far as may be required for the
purposes of the playgrounds indicated on the plan, and on study No.
7. At present, it is hardly thought that it would be necessary to
make the Sixth avenue entrance to the north; but its position is
indicated.[26]

[26] NOTE, 1868.—The postponement of operations in this quarter was
recommended because we found that the 106th street boundary of the
park required a revision, which could not, with propriety be urged
when the competition plan was made. The northern limit of the park
was, subsequently to the date of this report, extended from 106th to
110th sts., and so much of the original plan as applied to the ground
to the northward of that here described, was afterwards modified in
order to connect satisfactorily with our design for laying out the
additional territory which was approved by the commission in April,
1863.

The north-east section of the upper park is shown as an arboretum
of American trees, so that every one who wishes to do so may become
acquainted with the trees and shrubs that will flourish in the open
air in the northern and middle sections of our country.

[Sidenote: The Arboretum.]

This arboretum is not intended to be formally arranged, but to be so
planned that it may present all the most beautiful features of lawn
and wood-land landscape, and at the same time preserve the natural
order of families, so far as may be practicable. The botanical student
will thus be able to find any tree or shrub without difficulty. We
have selected this tract, of about 40 acres, in the upper angle of
the site, so as to interfere with the more special requirements of
the park as little as possible. The spot chosen is in some measure
separated from the rest of the grounds, by a ridge of land between
Fifth and Sixth avenues, and includes the buildings on Mount St.
Vincent. The wooden structures would be removed, and the brick chapel
converted into a museum and library of botany, similar to that at Kew,
but with more specific regard to landscape and decorative gardening.
In the park itself there will be numerous specimens of all the trees,
native or foreign, that are likely to thrive; but it is proposed
to limit this particular collection to American trees, because the
space necessary for a complete arboretum would occupy several hundred
acres, and also because it will afford an opportunity to show the
great advantage that America possesses in this respect. No other
extra-tropical country could furnish one quarter the material for such
a collection. In the whole of Great Britain, for example, there are
less than twenty trees, native to the island, that grow to be over 30
feet in height; while in America we have from five to six times that
number. There are, indeed, already over forty species of the largest
native trees standing in the park, which is nearly equivalent to the
number to be found in all Europe.

It is proposed to plant from one to three examples of each species
of tree on open lawn, and with sufficient space about each to allow
it to attain its fullest size with unrestricted expanse of branches;
the effect of each tree is also to be exhibited in masses, so as to
illustrate its qualities for grouping. Space is provided to admit of
at least three specimens of every native which is known to flourish in
the United States north of North Carolina; also for several specimens
of every shrub; these latter, however, except in particular instances,
are not expected to be planted singly, but in thickets, and as
underwood to the coppice masses; as may best accord with their natural
habits, and be most agreeable to the eye. Further details of this part
of the design will be found in the explanatory guide to the arboretum,
submitted with the plan, in which the proposed arrangement of all the
trees is set forth in order.

       *       *       *       *       *

The leading features of the plan have now, it is thought, been
referred to. It has not been considered necessary to especially
particularize the different trees proposed to be used in the various
parts of the park. For the purposes of the avenue, the American elm
naturally suggests itself at once as the tree to be used; and it is to
be hoped that the fine effect this produces, when planted in regular
lines, may in a few years be realized in the Central Park.

There is no other part of the plan in which the planting calls for
particular mention, except to the south of the skating pond; an
opportunity is there offered for an exhibition of semi-tropical trees,
and it is intended to treat that portion of the park in the manner
suggested in the study. A list of the trees to be used is appended to
the explanation of the arboretum.

The plan does not show any brooks, except a small one in connection
with the pool at the foot of Bogardus Hill, which can always be kept
full by the waste of water from the New Reservoir. Mere rivulets are
uninteresting, and we have preferred to collect the ornamental water
in large sheets, and to carry off through underground drains the
water that at present runs through the park in shallow brooks.

As a general rule, we propose to run footpaths close to the carriage
roads, which are intended to be 60 feet wide, allowing a space of four
feet of turf as a barrier between the drive and the path. Other more
private footpaths are introduced, but it is hardly thought that any
plan would be popular in New York, that did not allow of a continuous
promenade along the line of the drives, so that pedestrians may have
ample opportunity to look at the equipages and their inmates.

It will be perceived that no long straight drive has been provided on
the plan; this feature has been studiously avoided, because it would
offer opportunities for trotting matches. The popular idea of the park
is a beautiful open space, in which quiet drives, rides, and strolls
may be had. This cannot be preserved if a race-course, or a road that
can readily be used as a race-course, is made one of its leading
attractions.

[Illustration: FIRST STUDY OF DESIGN FOR THE CENTRAL PARK.

From a Wood-cut made in 1858.]

[Illustration: MAP OF THE CENTRAL PARK, 1868.]




  TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE

  Obvious typographical errors and punctuation errors have been
  corrected after careful comparison with other occurrences within the
  text and consultation of external sources.

  Some hyphens in words have been silently removed, some added, when a
  predominant preference was found in the original book.

  Except for those changes noted below, misspellings in the text, and
  inconsistent or archaic usage, have been retained.

  Pg 22: “chararacter” replaced by “character”.